Quickstart tutorial (#1044)
sosy-lab/benchexec: doc/benchexec-in-container.md

<!--
This file is part of BenchExec, a framework for reliable benchmarking:
https://github.com/sosy-lab/benchexec

SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2007-2020 Dirk Beyer <https://www.sosy-lab.org>

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->

# BenchExec: Containerized Environments

This document explains the complications of using BenchExec inside
containerized environments (such as Docker or Podman) and shows how you can
create your own interactive Docker image (or adapt existing ones) to use
BenchExec within it.

Note: It is possible to use BenchExec inside other container environments, e.g.
Docker, but we strongly recommend to use [Podman](https://podman.io/)
(compatible with Docker), as it provides "rootless" containers, i.e. its
containers are started as a regular user without sudo (just like BenchExec
containers). However, as the setup is largely the same, we provide it for
either case. In case you do want to use Docker, please also consider following
the (easy to implement) [security recommendations](#securing-docker-execution).

If you only require a non-interactive setup, i.e. only run a single BenchExec

> process inside a container, you can avoid most of the complications. See

Author: ... unless you `exec` benchexec :) but yes, agree, will change

> [below](#non-interactive-setups) for more details.

Reviewer: How about handling the easy case first? Basically just move that section up here and adjust the glue text. It would make it more clear that it is possible to run BenchExec inside a container without lots of configuration at least in some cases. Otherwise people might see the length of the instructions and just give up.

Author: Hmmm, yes, lets have a look.

since there simply are too many variables. In some cases, you may need to
slightly adapt some parts.

### Creating the Image

First, create the file `init.sh` with the following content:
```sh
#!/bin/sh
set -eu

# Create new sub-cgroups
# Note: While "init" can be renamed, the name "benchexec" is important
mkdir -p /sys/fs/cgroup/init /sys/fs/cgroup/benchexec
# Move the init process to that cgroup
echo $$ > /sys/fs/cgroup/init/cgroup.procs

# Enable controllers in subtrees for benchexec to use
for controller in $(cat /sys/fs/cgroup/cgroup.controllers); do
  echo "+$controller" > /sys/fs/cgroup/cgroup.subtree_control
  echo "+$controller" > /sys/fs/cgroup/benchexec/cgroup.subtree_control
done

# ... or whatever your init process should be
exec "$@"
```
and set it executable (`chmod +x init.sh`).

Now, pack this script into your Docker image and set it as entry point. If you
are working with a standard Docker image, create a file `Dockerfile`
```dockerfile
FROM debian:bookworm-slim
# Or whichever base image you are using

# Install python -- add further dependencies of your application here
RUN apt-get update && apt-get -y install \
    python3-minimal \

>   && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

Author: I see your point, but there also would be merit in having something as close to being copy-pasteable as possible. What about putting this into a comment? (Similar to the "install benchexec" part)

>   && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

Reviewer: Ok.

# TODO Install BenchExec with any method (apt install, pip install, or just copy the .whl)
# RUN pip install benchexec
# RUN wget https://github.com/sosy-lab/benchexec/releases/download/<current release>.whl -O /opt/benchexec.whl
# ... or any other method

# Copy the created script
COPY init.sh /init.sh

# Set init.sh as the entrypoint -- It is important to use brackets here
ENTRYPOINT [ "/init.sh" ]
# Set the default process to run
CMD [ "bash" ]
```
If you already have a Dockerfile, you only need to install BenchExec into it
and add the last few commands (i.e. copy `init.sh` and set the entrypoint).

With this finished, execute `podman build -t <tag> .` (or
`docker build -t <tag> .` when using Docker) in the directory where the
Dockerfile is located to build the container.

### Executing BenchExec in the Container

Start the image with
```

>   podman run --security-opt unmask=/sys/fs/cgroup --cgroups=split --security-opt unmask=/proc/* --security-opt seccomp=unconfined -it <tag>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
podman run --security-opt unmask=/sys/fs/cgroup --cgroups=split --security-opt unmask=/proc/* --security-opt seccomp=unconfined -it <tag>
```

```
or
```

>   docker run --privileged --cap-drop=all -it <tag>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
docker run --privileged --cap-drop=all -it <tag>
```

```
<!--
In principle, `--security-opt systempaths=unconfined --security-opt seccomp=unconfined`
should also be sufficient as Docker arguments,
but then mounting within the container still fails.
-->

> > **IMPORTANT**: The `--privileged` argument, gives the Docker container *full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **IMPORTANT**: The `--privileged` argument gives the Docker container *full
```

> root access* to the host, so make sure to include the `--cap-drop=all` flag,
> use this command only with trusted images, and configure your Docker
> container such that everything in it is executed under a different user
> account, not as root (more details [below](#securing-docker-execution)).
> BenchExec is not designed to run as root and does not provide any safety
> guarantees regarding its container under these circumstances.

With this, you should be able to execute, for example, `runexec echo`
inside the Docker container. (In case you opted for the `.whl` install, you
need to execute
`PYTHONPATH=/opt/benchexec.whl python3 -m benchexec.runexecutor <program>`
instead.)

> In case you want to modify this setup, please consider the notes mentioned
> [below](#background-and-technical-details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you want to modify this setup, please consider the
[background information below](#background-and-technical-details).
```

### Securing Docker Execution

When running under Docker, the user which executes the commands by default has
`UID` 0, i.e. has the permissions of `root` on the host system. For example, if
you mount a folder into the container, the processes started in the container
have *full write access* to these files, no matter what their permissions are.
As such, a small mistake in, e.g., an evaluation script that deletes temporary

> files, could easily wreak havoc on your system. Using Podman directly mitigates

Reviewer: I like that you mentioned a robustness problem such that people do not think "security is not important for me, so I do not need this"!

this issue, as the Podman container runs with the permissions of the current
user, not `root`, and thus cannot mess with system files (in particular, the

> "`root`" user in a Podman container is "mapped" to your current user).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`root` user in a Podman container is mapped to your current user).
```
"mapped" is actually the correct term, so no scare quotes necessary. Same for `root`.

To significantly increase security of your Docker execution, add

> ```docker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```dockerfile
```

# Create non-root user and set it as default
RUN useradd -ms /bin/bash user
WORKDIR /home/user
USER user
```
at the end of your Dockerfile. Note: This is still worse than using Podman
(e.g. privilege escalation within the container leads to obtaining root
permissions on the host) but drastically reduces the chance for accidental
problems.

### Non-interactive Setups

In case you intend to only execute one BenchExec process inside the container,
the setup simplifies notably. In particular, then, it is sufficient to execute

> the BenchExec process as entry point, without requiring the `init.sh` script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the BenchExec process as entry point in a standard container image with all required dependencies installed.
No `init.sh` script and no special steps in the Dockerfile are required.
```

For example, if BenchExec is installed in a container with tag `my-benchexec`,
you can simply execute

> `podman run <same flags as above> -t my-benchexec benchexec <arguments>`

Reviewer: I would like to have this as a ready-to-use command line like in the current docs, so let's copy the flags here and make it a separate code section with three back-ticks.

(analogous with Docker).

This is mostly useful for executing a large benchmark suite with `benchexec`
inside a container with the benchmarked tools installed, but processing the
results separately.

## Background and Technical Details

Just like BenchExec, tools like Docker and Podman make heavy use of cgroups to
isolate processes. Thus, in order to get them working nicely together, some
additional tricks are required, especially in an interactive container (e.g.
one with a shell, where multiple commands can be executed).

> The main complication of using BenchExec with Docker is that benchexec needs a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main complication of using BenchExec with Docker is that due to how cgroups work, BenchExec needs a
```

"clean" cgroup together with enabled controllers. On a standard system, cgroups
are usually managed by, for example, systemd, from which BenchExec can

> transparently obtain its cgroup. In contrast, in an interactive container, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically obtain a usable cgroup. In contrast, in an interactive container, the
```

root process usually is just a shell, which is placed in the "root" cgroup of

> the container. Due to the "no internal processes" rule (see the
> [cgroup documentation](https://man.archlinux.org/man/cgroups.7) for more
> information) any (non-root) cgroup can *either* contain processes *or* delegate
> controllers to a child group. Thus, the shell in the root cgroup of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the container. Due to the "no internal processes" rule (see the
[cgroup documentation](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/cgroups.7.html)
for more information)
a cgroup can *either* contain processes *or* delegate controllers to a child group
(the exception for the root cgroup only applies for the root cgroup of the host).
Thus, the shell in the root cgroup of the
```
We use the official links to the man-page project. And I think we can shorten the discussion of the special root case here.

Author: ah, I wasn't sure which page is the most "official" one :D

container (which is not the root cgroup of the overall system) prevents child
cgroups with controllers being created. So, we need to move the init process

> (and thus all subsequent ones) into a separte cgroup, which is the purpose of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(and thus all subsequent ones) into a separate cgroup, which is the purpose of
```

the `init.sh` script.

### Adaptation

There are many ways to achieve the required setup and users familiar with
Docker may choose to adapt the above procedure. There are a few peculiarities
to be aware of.

The goal is to create a cgroup called `/benchexec` with relevant controllers

> enabled. here, note that it is important that the cgroup has exactly this path,
> as benchexec uses this as a "fallback" on non-systemd setups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enabled. Note that it is important that the cgroup has exactly this path,
as BenchExec uses this as a fallback on non-systemd setups.
```

Additionally, you should be aware of the implications of the "no internal
process"-rule. Effectively, this means that there cannot be any processes in
the root cgroup of the container (which, notably, is *not* the root cgroup of
the system). So, for the provided `init.sh` to work, it needs to be directly
executed (with `ENTRYPOINT [ "/init.sh" ]`). In particular, using, for example,
`ENTRYPOINT "/init.sh"` would not work, since this creates a shell that then
runs `init.sh` as a sub-process, meaning that the root cgroup would not be
empty when we try to enable subtree control.

In case you run into `Device or resource busy` errors, the problem likely is
that you want to enable subtree control in a non-empty cgroup or, vice versa,
move a process to cgroup with enabled subtree control, both of which is
prohibited for cgroups by design. For debugging, it is useful to inspect the
`cgroup.procs` and `cgroup.subtree_control` of the cgroup in question. Here,
note that calls like `cat` do also create a separate process.

> Chowning the cgroup and only then switching to the created user is only
> required for Podman. In Docker, it is sufficient to add `USER user` to the
> Dockerfile and at the end of `init.sh` simply add `exec "$@"`. This is due to
> the docker image being executed with `--privileged`, which essentially
> disables proper permissions handling on, e.g., the cgroups, and any user in the
> image can modify the cgroups.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This seems to be a left-over?

<!--

> ## Cgroups v1

Reviewer: I think we should have this visible in the docs. Maybe above the background part?

Author: I just don't know how to do it with cgroups v1

Reviewer: I think the current text is fine for this case.
